---
layout: post
title:  "Knowledge Transfer through Behaviour Driven Development"
categories: [Company Culture, Testing]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Knowledge-sharing is arguably one of the most important aspects of an engineering team and is something I feel is under-utilised, at least in the teams I've been a part of.

If team members share the right information, and at the right level of abstraction, they can learn from each other's mistakes, collaborate on system architecture design, and discuss other more general high-level concepts. All of these can improve system stability and engineer efficiency.
<!--more-->

Unfortunately, it's common for information to be stored separately between mobile app development teams: bugs and fixes are often duplicated, and there is never an opportunity for high-level discussion due to the delta of knowledge between engineers.

I've worked in companies where mobile teams literally never talked to each other, despite the fact a lot of their problems were extremely similar.

Worse still is when the engineering department of a company sees itself as separate to the rest of the company, or even in direct opposition. I see this attitude prevalent in more junior engineers, who don't yet appreciate the social dynamics of a company, or understand that everyone is part of the same team, and the value of the end product is a collaborative effort across the board, not just engineering.

Ultimately, a cold attitude and lack of collaboration between teams duplicates problems, slows down communication and erodes efficiency.

## What causes this attitude?

I believe there is an inherent tribal attitude in Technology: I consistently see arguments between iOS and Android fans about which mobile OS is better, from both a development and consumer perspective, and also which development environment is better, Windows, Mac or Linux. Even technology choices can cause a visceral reaction from some engineers: "Ew, why are you using X framework? Y is the new hotness". In my experience, this is particularly prevalent in front-end web development, although I've also seen it occurring within mobile teams.

These attitudes are unhelpful at best and toxic at worst; it's important to understand Software Engineering is an incredibly complex process, and there is no perfect solution for any situation, it's always a game of balance and compromises to create high-quality software.

While the 1st party frameworks on both iOS and Android are extremely powerful, they also both contain API inconsistencies and functional limitations. The same can be said for any 3rd party Framework, tool or architecture. In this instance, perfection is impossible.

Putting our differences aside then, how can we move app development forward as a cohesive unit?

## Cross-platform frameworks and tools

A commonly touted solution to improving cohesiveness between mobile teams is cross-platform frameworks, most notably JavaScript-based technologies such as Ionic and React Native or C#-based Xamarin. 

While these technologies may work reasonably well in creating MVPs or simple CRUD based applications, mobile applications become exponentially more complex the more features are included, and these cross-platform frameworks simply do not provide the level of control or performance necessary to manage this complexity at scale. The debugging experience is also often frustrating, particularly when dealing with threading issues. This is what Airbnb experienced when they adopted React Native, eventually causing them to [drop the framework](https://medium.com/airbnb-engineering/sunsetting-react-native-1868ba28e30a){:target="_blank"} and move to a native implementation.

You could also write a c++ cross-platform library, which has its own set of issues. Most notably, due to differences in the way mobile operating systems handle concepts such as threading and app lifecycles, debugging becomes an absolute nightmare; tracking down a bug across different frameworks in multiple programming languages becomes almost impossible. There are also issues with hiring and retaining staff, as not many c++ engineers want to work on mobile platforms. Dropbox recently [tried this approach](https://blogs.dropbox.com/tech/2019/08/the-not-so-hidden-cost-of-sharing-code-between-ios-and-android/){:target="_blank"} and decided to ditch it in favour of separated native implementations.

There is also talk of using [Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/multiplatform.html){:target="_blank"} to create cross-platform mobile frameworks, but it remains yet to be seen if this can alleviate any of these aforementioned c++ issues.

As it stands, there's simply no incentive for Apple or Google to make cross-platform development easy, and I see no convincing 3rd party alternative. This means both business logic and UI must be written separately for all platforms, but there are things we can do to make this easier...

## Behaviour Driven Development (BDD)

When writing a mobile application for multiple platforms across multiple teams, we can utilise behaviour driven development (BDD) to unify our workflow. BDD is an extension of [test-driven development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development){:target="_blank"}, and uses business domain language to outline high level use-cases for different scenarios within a mobile application.

This means that we formally state, using high-level terminology, how each screen in the app should behave, given a set of contexts and actions.

For example, say we have a screen that asks the user for signup information, it might look something like this:

{% include figure.html src="/images/behaviour-driven-development/app.png" width="50%" caption="A simple sign-up screen" %}

You could imagine there would be some interesting behaviours in this screen:

- The email should be valid and show an error if it already exists in the backend system.
- The password should be strong enough to be secure.
- All fields should be valid before we're allowed to create an account and continue through the sign-up flow.

Instead of writing tests using bullet points, we can use something called the [given-when-then](https://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/GivenWhenThen.html){:target="_blank"} system, a formal structure for our behaviour tests. In this format, our screen's behaviour looks like this:

```
Given the email text-field
    When I input an invalid email
        Then show an error
    When I input an email that's already registered
        Then show an informative dialog
        
Given the password text-field
    When I input an invalid password
        Then show an error

Given the submit button
And the email and password are both valid
    When submit button is tapped
        Then create an account
```

We can see here the core behaviours of the sign-up screen, and if all these tests pass, then we can be confident that the behaviour is fairly consistent across all platforms. There will, of course, be some edge cases that crop up, at which point, you add a new behavioural test to the suite, and ensure all platforms pass once again, increasing app stability across the board!

To make adhering to behavioural tests a little easier on mobile platforms, you can use frameworks such as [Quick](https://github.com/Quick/Quick){:target="_blank"}, which help display these concepts as unit tests, and keep everything organised. You could even write a script as part of your build system that converts your behavioural test suite into unit test templates, ready to be implemented.

This kind of platform-agnostic business logic is helpful, providing a 'single source of truth' on how the app should behave, and giving both engineers and project stakeholders a shared design language.

#### Advantages of BDD
- Because teams are sharing knowledge and creating a formalised behavioural test suite, potential pitfalls can be spotted earlier, and spark high-level architectural discussions sooner.
- Having a unified test suite means you have a centralised 'contract' between engineers and stakeholders stating how the app should behave, improving communication and mitigating misunderstandings.
- Because any edge cases are added as new tests in the suite, and all platforms should be passing the tests, it can mitigate bugs that would have occurred at a later stage of development.
- Using BDD abstracts knowledge away from a single employee or team, reducing the risk of loss if someone leaves the company or gets sick, lowering your [bus factor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bus_factor){:target="_blank"}.
- Because everyone is using a shared design language and is working in the same behavioural context, it's easier for individuals to understand the problems of others, and help them find a solution.

## Conclusion
We've discussed here some of the common communication and knowledge-sharing pitfalls I've experienced in companies and hypothesised why I think they might be happening. We've discussed tribalism in tech culture, and explored cross-platform frameworks as a potential solution. Finally, I proposed behaviour driven development as a partial solution to knowledge-sharing and gave a simple example of how to use BDD in practice.

Ultimately, communication between teams in technology is hard, and while there are certainly differences in the tools and frameworks being used by mobile engineers, there are ways to build bridges, improve communication and make engineer's lives easier in the process.
