---
layout: post
title:  "From Britain to Berlin: A Guide for Expats"
categories: [Lifestyle]
---

Berlin is arguably one of the largest and most active tech hubs in Europe, with hundreds of startups emerging every year, and with larger technology companies now starting to open offices. It also boasts some interesting lifestyle advantages including cuisine, food and culture.

I moved to Berlin in 2019 to be with my girlfriend, where I now work as an iOS Software Engineer. I've previously lived and worked in several UK cities including London, and I'm fortunate enough to have seen quite a lot of the world, from Europe and the USA to Australasia and North 
Africa.

Through my experiences, I've learned that despite what the media would have you think, different people and cultures are generally very similar, however it's our differences which make life interesting.

With this in mind, a good friend of mine recently informed me he was considering a move to Europe, and asked about my experiences. I thought instead of keeping this information private, I should publish it so that others might benefit.

### Social Values
- The general vibe in Berlin is fairly laid-back, I don't often feel stressed getting around, and people seem to be generally fairly happy, especially in Summer.
- Berliners enjoy a good work / life balance, with 30 days holiday being normal for most contracts.
- In my experience, Germans generally seem more privacy-conscious than other European countries, and particularly value their freedom and civil liberties.
- Berlin is a very international city, I've met and worked with people from all over the world, including the USA, Brazil, Eastern Europe and beyond.
- Germans have a certain "no-bullshit" attitude. Coming from the UK, pleasantries are an important part of social interactions, whereas Germans seem to "get to the point" of the conversation a lot faster. This directness can often come across as rude, and was particularly jarring when I first moved to the country - in fact it still catches me out sometimes.
- Unlike North American, Australasian or even Scandinavian countries, learning the local language is essential. You can get by speaking only English, however it makes certain interactions much more complicated or even impossible, such as dealing with governmental institutions. It's also much harder to make local German friends if you don't speak the language. That being said, most tech companies in Berlin, especially startups, will use English as their main language.

### Culture
- Berlin has a huge cultural history, and it often feels at times like I'm living in a museum. As a fan of contemporary European history, I enjoy spending time in places of historical significance, and where better than Berlin? From the rise of the Prussian Empire, to the world wars, the DDR and the fall of the wall, Berlin is a city ravaged by historical politics and war, and you can still see the scars today.
- There are over 170 museums in Berlin, from German history and art collections to science and technology. An annual pass is €25, providing extremely good value for money.
- Berlin was historically the epicentre of classical music, and today boasts an impressive number of orchestras and opera houses, as well as Jazz bars.
- Berlin is also great for contemporary music, with most bands stopping Berlin on European tours. It's also famous for electronic music, and hosts world-class nightclubs and raves, if you're into that sort of thing.

### Transport
- The public transport system in Berlin is run by Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe (BVG), through which you can buy tickets in a station or through their app. The system itself is quite extensive, running all the way to Potsdam and both of the city's airports. Trains run regularly, and an annual card is fairly cheap compared to London, at €55/mo.
- Cycling is fairly safe, and the streets are mostly paved with cycle lanes, depending on the area you are in. It's nothing compared to what you'd see in Amsterdam, but certainly better than the half-hearted efforts made in London. Strangely though, it's rare that you see someone wearing a bike helmet in Berlin. I'm not sure if that speaks to the safety of the bike infrastructure, or the attitude of the locals.
- Train links to the rest of Germany are fairly good, if a little expensive. The trains are usually on time, and you can get anywhere in Europe from Berlins main train station. Bear in mind I'm used to the National Rail service in the UK, and so my experiences with train networks are fairly jaded; it doesn't take much to impress me at this point.
- International flights can be taken from either of the two airports, Tegel or Schönefeld. Both are fairly accessible, and equally antiquated. A big controversy in Berlin and around Germany is the building of the new BER airport, which is many years late and many millions of euros over budget. The current date of its opening is in late 2020, but we shall see. If you'd like to hear more, I highly recommend the podcast [How To F#€k Up An Airport](http://www.radiospaetkauf.com/ber/){:target="_blank"} by Radio Spaetkauf, who explain what went wrong in great detail.
- In terms of actual flights, you can get around Europe fairly easily, and there are a handful of direct flights to New York, but otherwise, you'll need to change in another city, usually Frankfurt or Düsseldorf. There are also some extremely cheap flights to Eastern Europe, which my girlfriend and I have recently been enjoying for our holidays.


### Environment
- Berlin is a fairly new city in European terms, being originally founded in 1237, and was badly bombed in WW2. This means a lot of the infrastructure has been rebuilt using more contemporary city-planning concepts. There are a lot of open spaces, parks and the streets are wide compared to older cities. This isn't to say there isn't some old-European charm however; especially in the West and Mitte you can find some truly stunning neo-classical architecture, as well as quiet allées and parks.
- Between 1961 and 1989 the city was also divided into two halves, the Ally-controlled West and the Soviet-controlled East. The development of these two halves was naturally very different, and you can still see this difference today; The West is typically more affluent and built-up whilst the East is spacious, yet underdeveloped.
- There are many lakes and forests surrounding Berlin, and it's common during the summer to spend the day swimming or going walking.
- It's worth noting Germans generally have a positive attitude towards the environment, with an emphasis on recycling and sustainable living.

### Climate
- Since I've moved to Germany, the summers here have been incredibly hot, and very long. You often see people out enjoying the sunshine, whether it's in a local park or at the lakes. Despite the world increasing in temperature every year, it's uncommon to see air-conditioning units in residential properties, and so we've had to make do with rotary fans. I wonder if this will change in future years.
- Winter can be cold, especially during Jan - Feb, when temperatures can go below freezing, however generally it's dry and temperate. The Christmas markets more than make up for this.
- Being from the UK, I'm used to unpredictable weather, and experiencing rain at any times of the year. What surprised me about Berlin was how set the seasons are; It's much more predictable.

### The Tech Scene
- Berlin has one of the most active tech scenes in Europe. Around 500 startups are opened here every year, and it's truly a hotbed of activity in that respect.
- This does mean however a lot of jobs are volatile: myself and several of my friends have lost our jobs simply because the firm we were working for ran out of runway or had to downsize.
- The influx of startups here has encouraged larger firms to open offices here: Google, HelloFresh, Apple, Clue, Amazon, Soundcloud, N26 to name a few. I still don't believe Berlin compares to London in its count of larger companies, but it seems as though the industry here in Berlin is still growing, and has yet to reach peak maturity.
- There are a lot of conferences and meet-ups here in Berlin, including [AltConf Berlin](http://berlin.altconf.com){:target="_blank"}.
- Most companies use English as their primary language, whilst a minority will use German. The disadvantage of working for an English speaking firm is that you never get a chance to practise and be fully immersed in the language!
- Some Germans, particularly older folks, have a strange technical phobia that I've not experienced in the UK. There is an obsession with using cash rather than card payments, you rarely see self-service checkouts, and governmental services are all done using antiquated online services, or even the post. It's a strange juxtaposition to live in a city with so much technical innovation, yet require three separate in-person appointments to renew a driving license...

### Cuisine
- German food, like British, traditionally doesn't have the best reputation. It's an amalgamation of Eastern European cuisine with French and Italian. This isn't the case in Berlin. Because of its immigration background, it's an absolute melting pot of amazing cuisines from all over the world: Chinese, Thai, Turkish, Vegan, Indian, to name a few.
- Alcohol is cheap in Germany; I'm consistently shocked when I visit London and am expected to pay upwards of £6 for a pint of beer. A lot of wine is grown in South Germany, and is light on the palate, while German beer has an international reputation of its own.
- I still haven't found a curry house here that compares with the quality you'll find in the UK!

### Housing & Governmental Policy

- The rental market in Berlin is currently terrible, as lots of young people are moving to the city for jobs. This means rent is rising and it's harder than ever to find a place to live. The government is trying to push back by implementing a rent freeze in 2020, but it remains to be seen if this will alleviate the market pressure.
- It's more normal in Germany to rent for your entire life than ever buy a place of your own. I'm not exactly sure why this is, but I do know mortgage down-payments here can be upwards of 30%, suggesting it's something that's done later in life when you start a family, rather than the UK where everyone is encouraged to get on the property ladder as soon as possible.
- There are naturally more expensive and cheaper places to live, but the cheaper stuff tends to be in the east, in soulless housing blocks lacking any sense of local community. To find something in a nice area, you can expect to pay more.
- There's an extremely high tax rate for unmarried people, equivalent to over 50% including public medical insurance, however the healthcare and social services here are world-class; I get a general feel most people are well looked after.
- There are strict rules on "false freelancers", where you contract for one company for an extended period of time, similar to the IR35 rule in the UK. This means extra pension insurance contributions for freelancers.

### Conclusion

Overall, I'm happy living in Berlin. There is a blossoming tech scene here, and many lifestyle advantages as a young person. There are however some obvious caveats, including the language barrier, bureaucracy and some cultural differences. I would wholeheartedly recommend anyone in a similar position to consider living here, however be prepared for an uphill battle regarding housing and integrating into the community if you don't speak the German language.

Thanks for reading, if you have any questions or comments, please use the contact button at the bottom of the page to get in touch.

Tim
