# Continous integration

Notes:
CI is a philosophy
Build systems are a tool

Advantages:
Your branch won't go out of date with the primary branch, no merge hell
Your team gets exposure to the status of your work, brings up architeectural big issues
Way easier to code review a smaller diff
Unseen interactions between two components can cause problems. Sooner this stuff is integrated together the sooner these bugs arise.
This applies to development, testing and deploment.

How to make CI a reality?:
Break large features into chunks.
Some modules don't have to be touched.
View Controllers don't have to be presented.
API wrappers and services don't have to be called.
These can be unit tested, code reviewed, merged and deployed without being used.
Even better, have remote feature flags. Completely seperate development and deployment from feature releases.

Of course, this means more code reviews.
This is good, but more overhead for the team.
A code review waiting is a dependency that needs to be resolved. Help your team members and review.

CI can also apply to design and product teams:
Get incremental designs to engineers and provide notifications (Zeplin etc.) when updates occur.
Same for product, consistently expose the needs of the shareholders, don't wait until sprint-planning.
Same for manual testers, run smoke tests or high-level automated UI tests to raise issues earlier.

Remember: high-quality software is a continious effort, and the more synced an organisation is the better.