# iOS ARCHITECTURE IN 2020

https://medium.com/flawless-app-stories/the-only-viable-ios-architecture-c42f7b4c845d

#Intro

Architecture is a useful tool, and a topic of hot debate in iOS, particularly with SwiftUI and Combine reactive programming. It formalises use of SOLID principles across a team, and is a useful guideline of how to modularise code, however it can't solve everything.

Has an interesting history, here is the history.

# MVC
Apps were simple enough to be ok
As testing became a thing, we needed to change

Apps get exponentially more complex with new features
Testing is a thing

Can still be used today if done properly. The advantage of using something different is formality in a team.

# MVP
- MVP, kitchen sink syndrome

# MVVM
- MVVM, also kitchen sink syndrome
- MVVM and RxSwift, reduced boilerplate but hard to debug, and who wants dependencies? Bad to change programming paradigm, big irreversible decision.

# VIPER
- separates things nicely
- very testable
- very verbose, lots of files
- overkill for simple apps
- Data is still mutli-directional through the presenter

# VIP
- Similar to VIPER
- Unidirectional data flow

# Important to remember
Many devs try to find the perfect architecture, but it doesnt exist.
It's all contextual, and different apps require different archs. All Archs have downsides. Futhermore, archs are more like guidelines, and like everything, it's most powerful when you know when to break it and be flexible.

# 2020

https://nalexn.github.io

- Link to new article
- Go through Russian guys stuff
- With SwiftUI, Apple has chosen MVVM
- SwiftUI solves the single source of truth issue, with bindings.
- Eventually we'll have bindings from CoreData, it's still early days
- Combine is the UI-agnostic equivilent, used for service-layer data binding
- Because we have Apple's blessing with Reactive programming, if I was starting greenfield today I would use RxSwift with MVVM, with a view to move to Combine as soon as iOS 13 is heavily adopted by the user-base, and a long-term view to migrate all UI code to SwiftUI, but we're a long way away from that bc of performance issues and missing functionality.
