# Mobile engineers thinking they are special

	
- Title should use power words: e.g., reliable, scalable, high-performance, robust, low-complexity, or low-cost.
- Headline should be a powerful message which attracts attention



### INTRO

Knowledge-sharing is arguably one of the most important aspects of an engineering team, and is something I feel is under-utilised, at least in the teams I've been a part of.

Knowledge-sharing allows team members to learn from each others mistakes, collaborate on system architecture design and discuss other more general high-level information. These concepts either improve system stability or engineer efficiency.

Unfortunately, it's common for information to be stored separately between app development teams (iOS, Android, front-end web): bugs and fixes are often duplicated, and there is never an opportunity for high-level discussion due to the delta of knowledge between engineers.

I've worked in companies where teams literally never talked to each other, despite the fact a lot of their problems were extremely similar.

Worse still is when the engineering department of a company sees themselves as separate to the rest of the company, or even in direct opposition. I see this attitude prevalent in more junior engineers, who don't yet appreciate the social dynamics of a company, or understand that you're all a team, and the value of the end product is a collaborative effort across the board, not just engineering.

Ultimately, a cold attitude and lack of collaboration between teams duplicates problems, slows down communication and erodes efficiency.

### WHY DOES THIS HAPPEN

I believe there is an inherent tribal attitude in Technology: I consistently see arguments between iOS and Android fans about which mobile OS is better, from both a development and consumer perspective, and also which development environment is better, Windows, Mac or Linux. Even technology choices can cause a visceral reaction from some engineers: "Ew why are you using X framework? Y is the new hotness". In my experience this is particularly prevalent in front-end web development, although you often see it happening in mobile teams.

These attitudes are unhelpful at best and toxic at worst; it's important to understand Software Engineering is an incredibly complex process, and there is no perfect solution for any situation, it's always a game of balance and compromises to create high-quality software.

The 1st party frameworks on both iOS and Android are, while powerful, both full of API inconsistencies and functional limitations. The same can be said for any 3rd party Framework, tool or architecture.

Putting our differences aside then, how can we move app development forward as a cohesive unit?

### CROSS PLATFORM SOLUTIONS
- Writing business logic twice or three times sucks but is sometimes required. There's no convincible cross-platform solution yet. React-native sucks, writing c++ libraries sucks, hosting a local web server is slow and introduces threading issues. There is talk of kotlin cross-platform frameworks but this is still in it's early stages.

- Even with a thin client based stack, this has it's disadvantages, mostly speed. And there will always be cross-platform code.

### THE ACTUAL SOLUTION

- Writing cross-platform use-cases and behavioural / unit tests is possible and useful. The ios, android and web teams should be working closely to sync-up their business logic so if bugs arise, tests can be added to all platforms and everyone benefits.

### Advantages
- Bugs come up earlier
- Tests are written
- Entire stack becomes more robust
- Centralized knowlwedge is reduced, meaning if someone leaves it's less of a biggie
- Also, it's easier for everyone to understand the environment of a problem.
- Also, shared terminology is good for comms.

### Conclusion
