# Async comms
TODO:
- What is it
- Why is it good
- Why is it bad
- Companies fuck it up constantly
- Read doc you made for hibooks

Useful when you're in different places
Has value even in-office, for allowing flexibility and quality of life
Automatically archives info - good for reference onboarding

Never let someone else be blocked
Write high-level documentation, tools used, best practises etc. You don't want it to have to change
Unit tests and documentation  help compensate for lack of shared understanding
Have engineering domains in the team, see other article
Have formal development process in place, don't rely on word-of-mouth
Weekly engineering reports, high level knowledge for company wide
Weekly engineering sync-up, everyone brings up points and discuss internally
Proper on-boarding checklist

Use async tools when possible, long slack messages, documentation and design, zeplin etc.
Use long messages, explain clearly and deeply, provide all the info needed. It might also help you understand the issue.
Don't expect a reply at once, try to encourage parralelism in your workflow, have multiple things to do.
Use simple language, avoid locallised jargon.
Change your language context based on who you're speaking too. Technical / product / other etc.
Have a shared domain language. Favourites / Liked / Bookmarked / Wishlist etc.
Meetings: do you really need one?
Be aware of time zone differences and work-loads.
Write an adgenda of stuff to discuss
If one of you are on laptops, everyone should be on laptops. It levels the playing field.
Write actions, decisions, points of interest. Document this in public documentation. This is a reminder and also documentaiton for absent members.