# Dependency mgmt 3 parts
## Part 1: Dependency mgmt at the code level
- The word dependency mgmt can be scary
- Like many things in tech, it can mean something different depending on the layer of abstraction you're working at
- Depedency mgmt is about organising the references to your dependencies in a way that's extensible and testable.
- Dependency mgmt isn't about reducing absolute dependencies, less dependencies are always better as it makes your code more robust, but dependencies are an inevitable part of software, otherwise if no module talked to anything else, then functionality wouldn't exist.
- In code, it simply means when a type references another type, that's a dependency, if you changed the other type, it would fuck up the first type somehow
- On a code level, this means extracting the responsibility of creating those dependencies to another type.
- In SOLID principles, types should only be responsible for one thing. A type should not be responsible for a) it's primary responsibility and b) creating it's dependencies. That means it's dependencies must be created in another object, and passed to this object. This process is called dependency injection.
- Dependency injection can be done a number of ways, but the most common is constructor injection. This is good bc it enfoces no optionals, and you can always be sure an object has everyhting it needs to function.
- There is also property-based injection which is more annoying or dangerous if you use !.
- There is also parameter based injection which can be useful for passing factories, however can be very verbose and annoying.

## Part 2: Dependency mgmt at an architectural level
- On a project level, this means organising types into well constructed frameworks, so different functionality can be imported on an as-needed basis rather than importing everything from web services to font helpers just to write a simple app.
- This also means you can reuse domain-specific frameworks accross targets, and even your entire company.
- It also means not using 3rd party dependencies. iOS moves quickly, and they can break if not well maintained. Could your company maintain this lib if needed? You need to understand the entire framework, only include it if it's well maintained, is going to save you actual time, not increase project complexity or fuck up onboarding (RxSwift), and you could take it over if needed.
- Bring exernal services into your webapi, manage keys and usage, and reduce client complexity. Thin client is good if possible.

## Part 3: Dependency mgmt at company level
- Dependencies are not just in code or across frameworks, they can also be in the architecture and culture of the company.
- Whenever a team member needs something from another team member, that's a Dependency.
- For example:
- Testers need the newest build (both internal and external, even external testers are unknowingly witholding value if they don't have the latest beta)
- Engineer needs designs
- Design needs copyrighting
- Copyrighting needs C-level approval
- etc.
- TODO: Update provide async comms stuff here
- Reference agile etc. Do some reading.
- Structure your work to allow parralelism.
- Never allow someone else to be blocked.
- Automate as much as possible. If the answer to a question can be automated, do it. Always be striving to improve the companies workflow.
- Seem to remember: treating meetings seriously and having notes before. And making notes for afterwards, document meetings properly.
- Rely on async comms better, properly structure your questons to each other and don't expect a rely now, do something else.
- Have dedicated team-members for domains.
	- CI and devops
	- Testing
	- Code quality
	- Deployment
- Context is important. Depends on the stakeholders.
- Use high level documentation.
- Use universal terminiology. Doesn't matter if it's technical, as long as everyone understands it. If they dont? Help explain. Document this also.
- Everything is getting more cultural, be aware and don't use culture specific language or idioms.
- Be efficient and direct.